#### Johnson v. Griffin, 85 F.4th 429 (6th Cir. 2023)

<p class="case-h1">SUTTON, Chief Judge.</p>

Kathy Griffin, a California-based celebrity and social activist, sent a series of tweets to her two million Twitter followers asserting that Tennessean Samuel Johnson, the CEO of Tennessee-based Visu-Well, had engaged in homophobic conduct. She encouraged her followers to make him "online famous" and tagged his company. She then asked his employer to "remove" him from the Board of Directors and threatened that the "nation would remain vigilant" if it did not. Within a day of her first tweets, the company fired Johnson and removed him from the Board. Johnson and his wife sued Griffin in federal court in Tennessee, claiming (among other things) that she tortiously interfered with his employment. Griffin argued that her tweets did not subject her to the State's personal jurisdiction, and the district court dismissed the case. We disagree and reverse.

<p class="case-h1">I.</p>

On April 24, 2021, Samuel Johnson sat down for dinner at a hotel in Franklin, Tennessee. Shortly after, a group of forty to fifty teenagers began taking prom pictures nearby. The boisterous teenagers apparently disturbed Johnson and other customers, prompting him to ask the chaperone to settle them down. One of the teens, who was wearing a red prom dress, overheard the request and confronted Johnson, all while his boyfriend filmed the interaction. The video is not a picture (or record) of clarity. But at a minimum, it captures Johnson saying that the student in the red dress "looks like an idiot." And at a minimum, it captures the boyfriend trying to goad Johnson into reacting still more negatively to the student's attire. Johnson left the hotel to have dinner somewhere else.

The boyfriend posted the video to his TikTok account. TikTok deleted the clip soon after. But other users downloaded it and reposted it to social media sites, including Twitter. The clip came to the attention of VisuWell's Board chairman, who assured Johnson that the company would stand by him.

That situation changed starting at 1:45 in the morning of April 26, when Kathy Griffin retweeted the clip to her two million followers. It came with this comment: "If this is Sam Johnson in Nashville, Tennessee, the CEO of @VisuWell, healthcare-tech-growth strategist, married to Jill Johnson where they may reside in Franklin, Tennessee, it seems like he's dying to be online famous." Below the tweet is the video accompanied by this caption (apparently not supplied by Griffin): "Homophobic POS piece of s\*\*\* in Tennessee harasses a teenager for wearing a dress to prom." As with other incidents in which Griffin has "doxed" individuals by accusing them of bad behavior and posting their addresses and workplaces on the internet, her tweet identified Johnson as a Nashville-based "healthcare-tech-growth strategist" and the CEO of VisuWell. She also tagged VisuWell, which meant that the tweet went directly to VisuWell and which enabled her readers to link directly to the company's profile if they wanted to add their two cents. When the boyfriend tweeted at Griffin within the hour to express his thanks for taking his video "viral," she replied that she was "grateful" he had filmed it and offered to do "anything" she could do to help. Several hours later, Griffin tweeted two pictures of Johnson's face with the caption: "Who is? THIS Sam Johnson of Franklin Tennessee."

In response to Griffin's first tweet, several VisuWell customers condemned Johnson and threatened to reevaluate their business ties. At the time, VisuWell was a fast-growing tech start-up, whose "commercial success," according to the complaint, "was due in large part to the proprietary software program" Johnson developed. During his three years as CEO, the complaint notes, he "helped increase its sales by 1,200%." Despite its prior offer of support, VisuWell fired Johnson as the CEO and announced this decision on Twitter in a reply to Griffin's original tweet. Griffin responded to VisuWell's tweet by asking if it had removed Johnson from the Board as well and demanding to know what "measures" VisuWell was taking. She warned that keeping him on the Board would suggest that it "intends to rehire" him, adding that "the nation will remain vigilant." VisuWell responded that it had fired him, then clarified in a follow-up tweet that it no longer employed Johnson in any capacity. Still, the Johnsons continued to receive threats and face harassment while some of Griffin's followers celebrated by tweeting that they had succeeded.

The Johnsons sued Griffin in federal court in Tennessee for tortiously interfering with Johnson's employment, inflicting emotional distress, invading their privacy, and negligently injuring them. The district court dismissed the lawsuit for lack of personal jurisdiction over Griffin.

<p class="case-h1">II.</p>

Federal courts start with state law in determining whether they have personal jurisdiction over a defendant in a diversity case. At its broadest, Tennessee's long-arm statute authorizes courts to exercise personal jurisdiction "on any basis not inconsistent with the constitution ... of the United States." The Fourteenth Amendment's Due Process Clause limits state courts' ability to exercise jurisdiction over an out-of-state defendant. Because the parties have not identified any other section of Tennessee's long-arm statute that would determine jurisdiction here, "due process is all we must address." 

Due process requires the defendant to possess "certain minimum contacts with" the forum State "such that the maintenance of the suit does not offend traditional notions of fair play and substantial justice." Contacts with a forum state may generate two potential types of personal jurisdiction over an out-of-state defendant—"specific" jurisdiction arising from the defendant's "case-related contacts" and "general" jurisdiction arising from the defendant's "generic connections" to the State. At stake in this case, as the parties agree, is only the possibility of specific jurisdiction over Griffin.

To possess specific jurisdiction over an out-of-state defendant, the defendant's "suit-related conduct" must show a "substantial connection with the forum State." Tortious conduct satisfies this requirement when the defendant intentionally cultivates contacts with the forum State, as opposed to forming "random, fortuitous, or attenuated contacts."

Two cases "bookend" this application of personal jurisdiction to intentional torts. The first, _Calder v. Jones,_ establishes that the effects of intentional torts sometimes may establish personal jurisdiction. In that case, a California actress sued Florida journalists in California for publishing a libelous article. The Supreme Court permitted the California court to exercise personal jurisdiction over the journalists, observing that they had engaged in intentional conduct "expressly aimed at California," not "untargeted negligence." They consulted "California sources" for the article whose "focal point" concerned California. And they knew that the actress would experience the brunt of the injury in California, where the magazine had its largest circulation and where she lived and worked.

The second case, _Walden v. Fiore_, identifies the other side of the line. In _Walden,_ professional gamblers from Nevada sued an officer for seizing their cash at a Georgia airport. Although the officer had formed "contacts with the gamblers," whom he knew lived in Nevada, he had "no jurisdictionally relevant contacts with Nevada." The officer had never traveled to the State, let alone conducted activities in or contacted anyone there. His alleged torts against the Nevada residents occurred in Georgia, not Nevada. Only Georgia had personal jurisdiction over him.

Griffin's actions have more parallels to _Calder_ than to _Walden_. As in _Calder,_ the allegedly tortious "story concerned the Tennessee activities of a Tennessee resident. It impugned the professionalism of an executive whose career was centered in Tennessee." And the tweet "was drawn from Tennessee sources." Griffin intended that the "brunt of the harm" would befall Johnson in Tennessee when she urged her followers to pressure VisuWell, a Tennessee-based company, to fire him and urged VisuWell to remove him from the Board.

Griffin's repeated emphasis of Johnson's residence in Franklin and the company's home base in Nashville hammers that home. She "undoubtedly knew" that the "focal point" of her tweets concerned Tennessee. Confirming the point, Griffin's initial tweet "copied VisuWell directly" at the same time that she threatened Johnson and identified him as based in Tennessee—indeed more specific than that, as she told people his wife's name and that they lived in Franklin, a suburb of Nashville. Following VisuWell's tweet that it had fired Johnson, Griffin inquired whether it had removed Johnson from its Board, cautioning that "the nation will remain vigilant" if it had not. These intentional threats to VisuWell's Tennessee-based business plainly affected Tennessee. And they had real world consequences for Tennessee: Johnson not only lost his livelihood, but VisuWell also lost its leader and likely customers.

Griffin counters that _Blessing v. Chandrasekhar_ leads to a different conclusion. The case has many parallels to this one, most notably a lawsuit arising from the Twitter activity of Kathy Griffin. But to us, _Blessing_ captures the other side of the line. In that instance, Griffin posted about an "incident" involving Kentucky students on a trip to Washington, D.C. Her tweets encouraged followers to "name these kids," "shame them," and "let their school know how you feel about their students' behavior." We concluded that Griffin's actions did not satisfy Kentucky's long-arm statute, then added that personal jurisdiction would not have satisfied due process even if they had. We reasoned that these tweets, all targeting actions in Washington, D.C., resembled _Walden_ more than _Calder_ because Griffin never took any "affirmative steps" to communicate with individuals in Kentucky when she tweeted about the student's conduct. And the students felt the tweets' harm "wherever they happened to be located," not just in Kentucky.

Missing in _Blessing_ were allegations that Griffin had intentionally targeted Kentucky when provoking efforts to harass the students. The Johnsons' complaint, in marked contrast, focuses on Griffin's conduct that targeted Tennessee. In _Blessing,_ Griffin never communicated with the Kentucky school. Here, Griffin directly communicated with Visu-Well in her first tweet and, after that tweet prompted his firing, she followed up directly with VisuWell to urge it to dismiss Johnson from its Board of Directors, all while promising more harassment if the Tennessee company did not bow to her wishes. Unlike Griffin's tweets that affected Kentucky after its students returned home, her contacts with VisuWell went beyond targeting the Johnsons to affecting "the state" and indeed its "economy," "more broadly." While Griffin's tweets in _Blessing_ arose from conduct in Washington, these tweets drew on a Tennessee source—the boyfriend's video—to attack a Tennessee resident for his conduct in Tennessee.

Had Griffin done in _Blessing_ what she did here, the case would have come out differently. Imagine if she had written to the students' Kentucky school and urged it to dismiss them. Imagine if she had committed an intentional tort by lying about, or recklessly describing, what had happened in a message to their principal. And imagine if the school had dismissed the students as a result. This intentional tort would have sufficiently targeted the Commonwealth, and we have little doubt that the case would have permitted personal jurisdiction over her. Just as one cannot avoid personal jurisdiction by putting the tortious missive in a private letter to a school or company, one cannot do the same by telling the world about it in a public letter. Due process provides no refuge for lies or reckless conduct directly sent to a decisionmaker in a forum, and it does not shield someone who intentionally incites third parties against that decisionmaker.

In the context of this employment dispute, the resolution is even more straightforward. We have not hesitated to hold that personal jurisdiction satisfies due process when a defendant's communications to decisionmakers in the forum state led to the plaintiff's firing. _See Koch v. Loc. 438, United Autoworkers Union,_ (6th Cir. 2002) (finding due process satisfied when a union official convinced the executive board to draft a letter that prevented the plaintiff from obtaining new employment out of state); _Onderik v. Morgan,_ (6th Cir. 1989) (establishing personal jurisdiction in a wrongful discharge case based partly on out-of-jurisdiction telephone calls and letters). That is especially so when the allegedly untrue statements tortiously interfered with an employment contract. _See Dorn v. Dominique,_ (6th Cir. 2023) (holding that out-of-state phone calls defaming Kentucky musician's agent sufficed to establish personal jurisdiction in Kentucky over the agent's tortious interference claim); _Burri Law PA v. Skurla,_ (9th Cir. 2022) (basing personal jurisdiction on calls and correspondence attacking plaintiff's competence). We see no reason why tweets sent directly to the decisionmaker do not suffice as well. _See also_ _Neal v. Janssen,_ (6th Cir. 2001) ("The acts of making phone calls and sending facsimiles into the forum, standing alone, may be sufficient to confer jurisdiction on the foreign defendant.").

Griffin responds that she disseminated these tweets generally to her two million followers, and mere knowledge that some Tennessee residents would read them does not suffice to establish personal jurisdiction. But she cannot deny that, by tagging VisuWell, she sent these communications directly to the company. And she cannot deny that her follow-up tweets about removing Johnson from the Board amounted to direct communications with the Tennessee company. By also sending these tweets to every state in the country through her two million followers, she does not inoculate herself from personal jurisdiction in a targeted state. Targeting Johnson and VisuWell in Tennessee, based exclusively on conduct in Tennessee, and urging action in response in Tennessee, "tethered" those effects to the forum. That conclusion would hold even if she had called only on non-Tennesseans to engage in her campaign.

What of the reality that, by tagging VisuWell, she also facilitated her broader communication efforts? The tagging, in other words, did two things: It directly communicated with the company's decisionmakers about firing Johnson, and it facilitated her speech by simplifying the process of allowing her followers to chime in about Johnson's conduct. _Calder_ tells us not to factor in First Amendment defenses in resolving a personal jurisdiction defense. That means that when the same act has two consequences—one creating jurisdiction, the other facilitating speech—the First Amendment has nothing to do with the jurisdictional inquiry.

We reverse and remand.